<pre>
  NEP: <to be assigned>
  Title: <NEP title>
  Author: Da Hongfei and Erik Zhang
  Type: Meta
  Status: Draft
  Created: April 14, 2026
</pre>

==Abstract==

Neo shall adopt a governance foundation that is more stable, credible, durable, and procedurally legible. This 
governance foundation shall clarify authority, strengthen community and tokenholder legitimacy in major governance matters, distinguish executive governance from independent oversight, improve transparency and stewardship, reduce reliance on informal founder-centered arrangements, and ensure that Neo's intended governance model is reflected in formal legal and institutional documentation.

==Motivation==

Neo's current governance condition is insufficiently formalized, insufficiently procedurally legible, and too dependent 
on informal coordination. Where authority, oversight, stewardship, and community authorization are not clearly defined, institutional credibility weakens, disputes become harder to resolve, and governance continuity becomes more fragile.

A durable governance order requires more than good-faith actors. It requires defined structures, reviewable procedures, 
clearer boundaries between executive action and oversight, and stronger institutional treatment of transparency, stewardship, and legitimacy. Neo therefore requires a governance foundation that can be formalized, reviewed, and executed in practice.

==Specification==

===Governance Foundation===

This section outlines the foundational requirements for governance. Subsequent sections must align on all adopted 
statements below.

# Structural Governance Reform

## Neo shall adopt structural governance reform rather than relying on ad hoc fixes or informal coordination.

# Durable Governance Order

## Neo shall maintain a governance framework intended to be stable, credible, and sustainable over the long term.

# Community and Tokenholder Authorization====

## Community and tokenholder authorization shall play a meaningful role in Neo governance, especially in matters of major public significance.

# Clear and Verifiable Governance Processes

## Neo governance shall rely on clear, defined, and verifiable processes, including on-chain mechanisms where appropriate.

# Separation of Executive Governance and Independent Oversight

## Neo Foundation governance shall clearly distinguish between executive decision-making and independent oversight.

# Board and Supervisor Structure

## Neo's governance structure shall include both a Board and a separate Supervisor or equivalent oversight function as formal institutional components.

# Defined Governance Roles and Procedures

## Governance roles, responsibilities, and procedures shall be formally defined so that authority, execution, and oversight are understandable, reviewable, and enforceable.

# Transparency Obligations

## Transparency regarding finances, governance decisions, and important institutional matters shall be improved and treated as an ongoing institutional obligation.

# Stewardship of Public-Mission Assets and Resources

## Assets and resources associated with Neo's public mission shall be subject to clearer institutional stewardship, controls, and accountability.

# Reduced Dependence on Informal Founder-Centered Arrangements

## Neo governance shall become less dependent on informal or founder-centered arrangements.

# Legal and Institutional Embedding

## Neo's intended governance model shall be reflected in formal legal and institutional documentation so that it is durable and executable in practice.

===Structural Direction===

To implement this governance foundation:

* Neo shall maintain a formal governance structure rather than relying on informal personal coordination.
* The Foundation's governance model shall distinguish executive action from oversight review.
* Major governance matters shall follow defined procedures rather than ad hoc discretion.
* Transparency and reporting shall be treated as ongoing institutional obligations.
* Stewardship of assets and resources tied to Neo's public mission shall be formalized through clearer control and review mechanisms.

===Operational Mandate===

====Legal Structure and Constitutional Design====
TBD
====Tokenholder Authority and Voting Model====
TBD
====Board Composition and Supervisor Design====
TBD
====Transition Rules and Founder Role Boundaries====
TBD
====Public Asset Stewardship, Attribution, and Control====
TBD
====Accountability, Historical Review, and Enforcement Scope====
TBD
====Tokenomics and Redistribution Measures====
TBD
===Expected Outcome===

If adopted, this proposal will provide a governance baseline for Neo that:

* affirms the need for structural governance reform;
* gives community and tokenholder legitimacy a defined role in major governance matters;
* formalizes the separation between executive and oversight functions;
* reinforces transparency and accountability as institutional obligations; and
* provides a clear foundation for resolving remaining governance design questions through dedicated follow-on work.

===Conclusion===

This proposal establishes the governance foundation that Neo should adopt as the basis for its next governance order. 
It is intended to create a durable, reviewable, and more legitimate institutional structure while enabling unresolved 
design questions to be addressed directly through subsequent governance work.

==Rationale==

This proposal establishes a governance foundation before specifying every downstream institutional detail. That 
approach is necessary because Neo first needs a common constitutional direction: governance should be structurally 
reformed, major authority should be more procedurally defined, executive and oversight functions should be clearly 
separated, and public-mission assets and decisions should be handled through stronger stewardship and accountability 
rules.

This proposal therefore focuses on first-order governance principles that should anchor all subsequent legal, 
procedural, and operational design work. More specific institutional choices may be developed in dedicated 
follow-on work, but they should be designed within this adopted governance foundation rather than in the 
absence of one.

==Implementation==

TBD